



Network Inventory YANG WG                                     M. Palmero
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                                C. Cardona
Expires: 3 September 2025                                            NTT
                                                                D. Lopez
                                                              Telefonica
                                                            2 March 2025


                A YANG Module for Entitlement Inventory
               draft-mcd-ivy-entitlement-inventory-latest

Abstract

   This document proposes a YANG module for incorporating entitlmements
   in a network inventory of entitlements.  Entitlements define the
   rights for their holder to use specific feature in a network
   elements.  The model is rooted by the concept of the capabilities
   offered by an element, enabled by the held entitlements, and
   considers entitlement scope, how they are assigned, and when they
   expire.  The model introduces a descriptive definition of
   capabailities and the entitlement use restrictions, supporting
   entitlement admistration and the understanding of the capabilities
   available through the network.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://dr2lopez.github.io/ivy-capability-entitlement/draft-mcd-ivy-
   entitlement-inventory.html.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-mcd-ivy-
   entitlement-inventory/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Network Inventory YANG
   WG Working Group mailing list (mailto:inventory-yang@ietf.org), which
   is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/inventory-
   yang/.  Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/inventory-
   yang/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/dr2lopez/ivy-capability-entitlement.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 September 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Scope of the Entitlement Model
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Modeling Capabilities and Entitlements
     3.1.  Capabilities
     3.2.  Entitlements
   4.  References
     4.1.  Normative References
     4.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The goal of any network elements are included as assets in the
   inventory of any network service provider is to be used to build such
   services, takind advantage of the features provided by the
   inventoried assets.  The use of many of these features are not
   necessarily associated with the acquisition of an inventoried network
   element, as their use required specific permissions, usually in
   termes of licenses issued by the network element provider explicily
   authorizing the use of a (number of) feature(s).  As the technology
   evolves, making network elements more modular and software-intensive,
   and even fully virtualized, the management of these permissions,
   their agrgeggation and application to enable a concrete network
   service becomes more relevant.  These trends also imply the
   combination of greater number of these permissions, within a given
   network element or in a number of then, implying an increasing
   complexity when trying to assess the feasibility of providing a
   specific service by integrating the necessary assets.  This draft
   proposes a YANG model for incorporating the management of these
   permissions, based on two essential concepts: capability and
   entitlement.

   Capability refers to the ability or power to do something, often
   indicating a skill, talent, or potential to achieve a specific
   outcome, and is commonly used to describe the features or functions
   of a system or device that enable it to perform tasks.  On its side,
   an entitlement corresponds to the right that someone has to do or
   have something.  Following this general definitions, the model
   considers entitlements as the means that grant specific holders the
   right to access particular capabilities of one or more of the assets
   in the network inventory.  The use of these capabilities may be
   restricted in various ways, such as by duration, usage limits, or
   predefined conditions.  Being able to exchange information on the
   state of the entitlements applicable to network elements can save
   time and facilitate decision making.  This document proposes a YANG
   model that, complementing the network inventory module, can provide
   the information an asset/entitlement adminstrator needs for this
   purpose.

1.1.  Scope of the Entitlement Model

   The entitlement model aims to provide an inventory of entitlements.
   This includes the entitled holders and the capabilities to which they
   are entitled.  Additionally, it offers information into the
   restrictions of the operation of the different assets (network
   entities and components).  In general, this model seeks to address
   the following questions:

   *  What entitlements are administered/owned by the organization?

   *  How are entitlements restricted to some assets and holders?

   *  What entitlements are assigned or installed on each assets?

   *  What constraints do the current entitlements impose in the assets
      functionality?

   *  Does the entitlement imposses any kind of global restrictions?
      What are they?

   *  What are the restrictions that each asset due to the entitlements
      it holds?

   The model is designed with flexibility in mind, allowing for
   expansion through the utilization of tools provided by YANG.

   The realm of entitlements and licensing is inherently complex,
   presenting challenges in creating a model that can comprehensively
   encompass all scenarios without ambiguity.  While we attempt to
   address various situations through examples and use cases, we
   acknowledge that the model might not be able to cover all corner
   cases without ambiguity.  In such cases, we recommend that
   implementations provide additional documentation to clarify thoese
   potential ambiguities.  The current model does not aim to serve as a
   catalog of licenses.  While it may accommodate basic scenarios, it
   does not aim to cover the full spectrum of license characteristics,
   which can vary significantly.  Instead, our focus is on providing a
   general framework for describing relationships and answering the
   questions exposed above.

   Withe the aim of clarifying the model scope, here are some questions
   that our model does not attempt to answer:

   *  What are the implications of purchasing a specific entitlement?

   *  Which entitlement should I acquire to get a specific capability?

   *  Is license migration feasible?

   *  What capabilities will be allowed if I install an entitlement in a
      specific device?

   *  Features or restrictions that depend on each user.  We are not
      covering this in the current version of this document, but it
      could be done if we expand the holders indentification.

   It is important to remark that the model primarily addresses the
   utilization of capabilities, rather than access control.  For
   instance, if a network device cannot be configured to use an
   arbitrary network protocol (e.g. MPLS) due to licensing restrictions,
   this implies that the organization owning the router (the holder in
   this scenario) is not permitted to utilize the MPLS feature.  This
   distinction is separate from, for instance, the ability of a specific
   user to configure MPLS due to access control limitations.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   (Glossary TBP.  We need at least formal definitions of "capability"
   and "entitlement")

3.  Modeling Capabilities and Entitlements

   The model is intended to facilitate information on all capabilities
   and entitlements associated with a set of inventoried assets under
   the same inventory management.  In scenarios where entitlements are
   tied to network elements, the element itself can provide this
   information.  Alternatively, providers may support something similar
   to a license server, which could house comprehensive information
   regarding an organization's entitlements.  Just by listing
   capabilities and entitlements, and reading their basic information, a
   NETCONF/RESTCONF client will be able to retrieve basic inventory
   information of available capabilities and existing entitlements.

   Note that the model uses lists based on classes on multiple parts to
   be able to extend functionality.

   (TBD: Provide examples of how this can be done in posterior releases
   of this document)

   Entitlements and features can be made available by means of do not
   specify which the assets (network elments or components) are actually
   assigned the entitlements, either through an installation or a
   similar operation.  For this, we augment the network elements form
   the network-inventory [I-D.draft-ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang-03]
   model with a new container called entitlement-information.  This
   container hold information of the state of entitlmenets in the asset.

3.1.  Capabilities

   Capabilities are modeled by augmenting newtwork-element in the ietf-
   network-inventory module in [BaseInventory] according to the
   following tree:

+--rw capabilities
   +--rw capability-class* [capability-class]
      +--rw capability-class                     identityref
      +--rw capability* [capability-id]
         +--rw capability-id                     string
         +--rw extended-feature-description?     string
         +--rw resource-description?             string
         +--rw resource-units?                   string
         +--rw resource-amount?                  int32
         +--rw supporting-entitlements
            +--rw entitlement* [entitlement-id]
            +--rw entitlement-id                 -> ../entitlements/entitlment/entitlement-id
            +--rw allowed?                       boolean
            +--rw in-use?                        boolean
            +--rw capability-restriction* [capability-restriction-id]
               +--rw capability-restriction-id   string
               +--rw component-id?               -> ../components/component/component-id
               +--rw description?                string
               +--rw resource-name?              string
               +--rw units?                      string
               +--rw max-value?                  int32

   The list of capabilities for a given element MAY contain all the
   associated capabilities provided by the element vendor for such an
   element, and MUST contain all the capabilities the network service
   provider operating the network element has acquired and entitlement
   for, independently of it being active or not.

   The capabilities of an inventoried asset may be restricted based on
   the availability of proper entitlements.  An entitlement manager
   might be interested in the capabilities available to be use on the
   assets, and the capabilities that are available.  The model includes
   this information by means of the "supporting-entitlements" list, that
   includes potential restrictions related to the status of the
   entitlement.  This can help organizations stay informed about their
   entitlement usage and take necessary actions to prevent potential
   violations or overuse of capabilities.

3.2.  Entitlements

4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

4.2.  Informative References

   [BaseInventory]
              Yu, C., Belotti, S., Bouquier, J., Peruzzini, F., and P.
              Bedard, "A Base YANG Data Model for Network Inventory",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-ivy-network-
              inventory-yang-05, 28 February 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ivy-
              network-inventory-yang-05>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Marisol Palmero
   Cisco Systems
   Email: mpalmero@cisco.com


   Camilo Cardona
   NTT
   Email: camilo@gin.ntt.net


   Diego Lopez
   Telefonica
   Email: diego.r.lopez@telefonica.com
